Outcomes research studies the end results of medical care – the effect of the health care process on the health and well-being of patients and populations.
It spans a broad spectrum of issues from studies evaluating the effectiveness of a particular medical or surgical procedure to examinations of the impact of insurance status or reimbursement policies on the outcomes of care. It also ranges from the development and use of tools to measure health status to analyses of the best way to disseminate the results of outcomes research to physicians or consumers to encourage behavior change.
The field of outcomes research emerged from a growing concern about which medical treatments work best and for whom. In large part because of its potential to address the interrelated issues of cost and quality of health care, public and private sector interest in outcomes research has grown dramatically in the past several years.
Funding for the federal government’s flagship program in outcomes research – the Medical Treatment Effectiveness Program (MEDTEP) administered by the Agency for Health Care Policy and Research (AHCPR) grew dramatically between 1989 and 1991 from $6 million to $63 million. Funding has increased more slowly over the past several years, to $73 million in 1993.
Insurance companies, employers, state and federal governments and consumers are all looking to outcomes research for information that will help them make better decisions about what kind of medical care is appropriate (and should be reimbursed), for whom, and when.
The broad ranging issues encompassed by outcomes research can be viewed as a complex puzzle that together will help improve the operation of the health care system and ultimately the health of Americans
What makes outcomes research different?
The Question It Asks
A hallmark of outcomes research is the breadth of issues it addresses. Outcomes research touches all aspects of health care delivery, from the clinical encounter itself to questions of the organization, financing and regulation of the health care system.
Each of these factors plays a role in the outcome of care, or the ultimate health status of the patient. Understanding how they interact requires collaboration among a broad range of health services researchers, such as physicians and nurses, economists, sociologists, political scientists, operations researchers, biostatisticians and epidemiologists.
2
The Setting It Studies
Outcomes research evaluates the results of the health care process in the real-life world of the doctor’s office, hospital, health clinic and even the home. This contrasts with traditional randomized controlled studies, funded mainly through the National Institutes of Health, which test the success of treatments in controlled environments. These are called efficacy studies. Research in real-life settings is called effectiveness research.
The Health Status Measures It Uses
Traditionally, studies have measured health status, or health outcomes, in terms of physiological measurements – through laboratory test results, complication rates (e.g. infections) or death. These measures alone do not adequately capture health status. A patient’s functional status, well-being, and satisfaction with care must compliment the traditional measures.
The Methods It Uses
Constraints of money and the time it takes to conduct large, long term clinical trials is a major challenge of outcomes research. One strategy of overcoming this barrier is to use existing computerized databases, such as those available from Medicare, Medicaid, private insurance companies, and major employers. Another strategy is to use simple questionnaires that patients can use to evaluate their own health and health care. Outcomes research also uses meta-analysis, a technique to summarize comparable findings from multiple studies.
These approaches complement the more standard research strategies involving the collection and analysis of information from medical records and other clinical and management data.
How can outcomes research provide answers for policy makers, clinicians, managers and players?
The field of outcomes research combines several types of research that together are providing better information to doctors and patients. This contributes to more informed decision making which will help improve the value for the health care dollar.
These include studies of the variations in medical practice patterns, effectiveness research that assesses which treatments for specific clinical problems work best for whom, appropriateness studies that determine the circumstances in which a procedure should and should not be performed, research that develops tools to identify patient preferences when treatment options are available, and research that creates methods to measure changes in health status and patient satisfaction with the health care process.
3
By Identifying Variations in Medical Care
Over the past two decades, studies have reported that residents of New Haven are twice as likely to undergo coronary artery bypass surgery as residents of Boston. Eight percent of the children in one Vermont community have tonsillectomies compared to nearly 70 percent in another community. Women living in the southern region of the United States have a 1.5 times greater rate of hysterectomies than women living in the northeast and the general rate of gastro-intestinal endoscopy is two times higher in the west than the northeast.
Health services researchers have been unable to explain these wide variations in physician practice patterns by patient characteristics or by the medical resources in a community.
Although many examples such as these have been found, it was only recently that outcomes researchers took the next step and asked, “which practice styles are best?” They are exploring whether the practice variations are signs of too much care, too little care or both. And they are exploring the circumstances under which patients benefit from a procedure and when they do not.
By Comparing the Effectiveness of Various Treatments and Procedures
The effectiveness of procedures or treatments depends on a variety of clinical and non- clinical factors. Clearly, whether the treatment itself works is the starting point. But many other factors can affect the success of a treatment, including:
• Training and experience of the provider: Does the outcome differ if the provider is a physician (specialist or generalist) or a nurse practitioner? Does the outcome differ if physicians have more or less experience doing a particular procedure?
• Communication among the caregiving team: Do outcomes differ as a function of the ability of the caregivers to work together?
• Financial incentives affecting the patient and provider: Does insurance coverage or the way a physician is paid (salary or fee-for-service) affect the outcome of care?
• Socio-economic status of the patient: Does poverty or ethnic background affect the way patients seek care or are treated once they are in health care system?
• Setting in which the care was provided: Do outcomes differ if care is provided in a hospital emergency room, health maintenance organization (like Kaiser Permanente) or a private doctor’s office?
4
What is most beneficial to one patient may not be for another. The challenge to the health services researcher is to provide the information that will help match specific treatments to individual patients.
By Developing Appropriateness Criteria
Even though a procedure has proven to be effective, it is not appropriate for every patient in all circumstances. For example, a study of Medicare patients showed that less than 60 percent of the bypass operations were clearly appropriate. Another
